Searching and Sorting in Matlab (#3199)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/searching-and-sorting-in-matlab/index.md

### SEARCHING AND SORTING USING MATLAB
### Introduction

> Searching is the process of locating a given object or data within a large number of data. Sorting is the arrangement of data in a specific required order. These algorithms are used in the computer database. A computer database is where all the computer data is stored. In the absence of these algorithms, locating various data in the computer is likely to take a lot of time; thus, these algorithms simplify this process and minimize the time search and sorting. There are various applications of searching and sorting, but the primary application is locating data within a given vector similar to the target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Searching is the process of locating a given object or data within a large set of data. Sorting on the other hand, is the arrangement of data in a specific required order. 
These algorithms are commonly used in databases and other computer applications. A computer database is where all the computer data is stored. In the absence of searching and sorting algorithms, locating data in the computer is likely to take a lot of time; thus, these algorithms simplify this process and minimize the time search and sorting. (**how is this a bad thing? make it more clear. Other than time, how does it affect computing?** ).
There are various applications of searching and sorting, but the primary application is locating data within a given vector similar to the target.
```

### Prerequisites
- [Matlab](https://www.mathworks.com/products/get-matlab.html?s_tid=gn_getml) installed.
- Proper understanding of [matlab](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/getting-started-with-matlab/) basics.

### Searching

> The main target of the search is the uniqueness of the data. For example, if you go to a bank, they ask for your bank number to get your bank account. It is made possible by search algorithms. There are two types of search algorithms. These are;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main target of the search is the uniqueness of the data. For example, if you visit bank, the process of retrieving your account details is made possible by searching algorithms. There are two types of search algorithms. These are;
```

- Sequential
- Binary search

### 1. Sequential search

> It is also known as linear search. Here, the target variable is compared to the entire vector or stop in a variable similar to the target. For example, we are given a vector and a target value to locate. First, we should identify the target value within this vector. If we find a similar variable, we give its index as the output, and if we don't, we provide an impossible index as the output. This impossible index could be something like -1. It is to show that the value is not found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also known as linear search.  (Define sequential search independently or give a link with  a more detailed definition) 
Here, the target variable is compared to the entire vector space (briefly define vector space) or stop in a variable similar to the target. For example, we are given a vector space and a target value to locate. 

First, we should identify the target value within this vector. If we find a similar variable, we give its index as the output, and if we fail to find, we provide an impossible index as the output. This impossible index could be something like -1. It is to show that the value is not found.
Below is a sample code that implements searching in matlab.
```

### Example
We have a vector M = [ 3 2 6 34 22 98 77 45 99 12] and we want to find 34. We will call our function as shown below;
```matlab
sequential_search(M, 34, 1, 10)
```
When we execute this, we get the output which is the index of our target value which is 4.

![index for the target](/engineering-education/searching-and-sorting-using-matlab/search_one.png)

For extensive data, it takes time for sequential search to locate a given data. This is because it compares all the data with the target value to get a similar variable. For fast searching, you need first to sort your data, but this is not the case for sequential search. Therefore, it is the only algorithm that is used to search unsorted data.

> ### 2. Binary search

Reviewer: Kindly explain more on binary search or link an article with more explanation. Maybe how binary search operates.
Also avoid using the word 'here' and 'it' , find an alternative that gives your article more command and style.

Do pass your article on Grammarly to help you remove the passive voices and repetitions.

```matlab
function index = binary_search_iterative(vector,target,first,last)
found = false;
while first <= last && ~found
mid = fix( (first + last) /2 );
if target < vector(mid)
last = mid - 1;                   %moving towards the beginning
elseif target > vector(mid)
first = mid + 1 ;                 %moving towards the end
else
found = true;
end
end
if found
index = mid;                      %Return the index if found
else
index = -1;                       % Return -1 if not found
end
```
Incase we have a vector A = [2 13 17 22 29 43 64 73 82 89 99] and we want to locate 73, the the call of this function will be
```matlab
binary_search_iterative(A, 73, 1, length(A))
```
The output will be;
![index of 73](/engineering-education/searching-and-sorting-using-matlab/search_three.png)

> ### Sorting

Reviewer: Just like searching, add a bit more details or link to where a reader can find more.

We must know how to sort our data since we have seen the advantage of binary search over-sequential search. As we have seen before, binary search deals with sorted data. Generally, we have three types of sorts: selection sort, quick sort, and merge sort. First, we will look at quicksort and merge sort.

### 1. Quicksort

> It is the most efficient type of sort and also easy to understand.

Reviewer: I find this a bit loose and ambiguous, please give a reader a clear description of quick sort. Just briefly.

Reviewer: Also before you proceed to code sample, introduce a reader on what you are trying to do or achieve.

```matlab
function v = quicksort(v) 
if length(v)<=1, return, end
% Recursive case
less = v<v(1);
smaller = v(less);
```
Here, we produce elements which are less than v(1) and the output assigned to less. 
```matlab
remainder = v(~less);
remainder = remainder(2:end);
```
Here, we are creating the remainder list. The logic remains the same, but we replace the `less` with `~less` to mean `not less` and produce value greater than v(1). `remainder(2:end)` This code is to remove v(1) from the list. It then carries a quick sort for the smaller and the remainder list.
```Matlab
left = quicksort(smaller);
right = quicksort(remainder);
```

> Generally, this quicksort divides the data into three parts: v (1), smaller, and remainder. v(1)is the first value in the vector. Smaller is a list consisting of all vectors less than v(1), while the remainder consists of all remaining values in vector(v). This quick sort is applied to v(1), smaller and remainder list. It sorts the smaller list, and this list we refer to as `left` and the remainder is sorted, and we call it `right`. So in calling our function, we use the `left` and the `right` that is;

Reviewer: I think a reader would find this difficult to follow, kindly break it down.

### SEARCHING AND SORTING USING MATLAB
### Introduction
Searching is the act of going or looking through (a place, area, etc.) carefully in order to find something while sorting Sorting is any process of arranging items systematically. This is something that is mostly popular in databases.

> Here, we will look at the two closely related problems: Searching and sorting. Both problems appear in applications involving databases, and without efficient solutions to these problems, databases would be virtually useless. They would be useless because databases that are large enough to hold the information we need would be too large to use. They would be too large to use because it would take too long to find what we are looking for inside them.

Reviewer: Introduce searching and sorting more clearly and how common you find them in databases in order to hook a reader to your article. Kindly elaborate on the 'problems. '

> Here, we will look at the two closely related problems: Searching and sorting. Both problems appear in applications involving databases, and without efficient solutions to these problems, databases would be virtually useless. They would be useless because databases that are large enough to hold the information we need would be too large to use. They would be too large to use because it would take too long to find what we are looking for inside them.

Reviewer: Also minimize repetitions while building your content

In this article we will look at the how to apply the Searching and sorting in Matlab.

### Prerequisites
- [Matlab](https://www.mathworks.com/products/get-matlab.html?s_tid=gn_getml) installed.
- Proper understanding of [matlab](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/getting-started-with-matlab/) basics.

> 

Reviewer: After prerequisites, kindly connect the article, maybe use a subheading and build on what you had introduced.
Make the article flowing

searching for; Arguments 3 and 4 give the beginning and the end, respectively, of the range of indices over which we wish to search. Most of the time,
when we call the function, we will set first to 1 and last to the full length
of vector, but sometimes we may wish to search only a limited range. Arguments 3 and 4 are there to provide this option. So for example, if we wish to
search all of a vector, named accounts, for the number stored in smith, we
would give the call,
```matlab
sequential_search(accounts, smith, 1, length(accounts))
```
but, if we wish to search only within, say, accounts(450:5600), we would
give the call,
```matlab
sequential_search(accounts, smith, 450, 5600)
```
As promised, this function returns –1, as a flag indicating failure, where failure means that the target value is not equal to any of the elements in the vector. To assist in setting the flag, we have used an internal flag called found
and the built-in functions false and true

### Sorting
A sorting algorithm that is not very efficient, but is simple enough to be readily understood is the selection sort. Here is a function that implements the

> selection-sort algorithm:

Reviewer: Do simple explanations on your matlab code using comments to help readers understand the code more
